README.md, before:

# Implementation of standard data structures

This repository contains all of the lab work done in CCE 3rd Sem Data Structure Lab. The DS lab was a pretty intense lab but it was worth it.
We had alternative week evaluations. I learnt to implement the standard data structures without using any sort of libraries. It helped to internalise 
the concepts. (You are allowed to use libraries outside the lab so don't worry)

Feel free to make changes and maybe suggest better codes.


## What you can find here
You can find the following codes here

- Basic Searching and Sorting Methods 
- Stack implementation using array, linkedlists and applications of stack like prefix,infix,postfix evaluation
- Single, Double, and circular LinkedLists programs
- Binary Trees
- Binary Search Tree and expression tree implementation.
- **Some thoughts and reflections** I would like to share to help you guys become better coders xD.

### If you are a junior reading this, keep following points in mind

You people are going to enter/entered the world of Computer Science, Development and programming in general. It's really vast and there
is a lot of cool and fun stuff to explore. Algorithms and Data structures is one such area. In general, you might be starting with this or some 
other field/track. You will realise that you are a newbie in lots of areas (and that is fine) and you will have to work your way up by practice and 
showing up daily (even if you are really passionate about it or not). There is no other shortcut and that is also good. The journey is the important thing.

- This repository is for your (and my reference). **So, use it when really required. But, do try your best and follow your teacher.** Ideally, you should 
  try to think and try enough till you are getting ideas (or if you have time). That way, even if you are not able to get it right, when you see the solution, you   will understand it quicker and it will stick for longer.

- Try implementing all the programs and additional exercises yourself. Try to play around a bit and learn to deal with segmentation faults. **Use cin and input   some variable in between to debug hint:infinite loop or segmentation fault** (Thanks to Veena Ma'am xD)

- Try not to copy. **You can see somebody else's implementation for reference though, then try to write on your own.** You will find yourself going back and forth 
  but that is okay. (Active learning - study something new and then try to reproduce it - the key ideas, concepts)
  
- You can check out standard code implementations available across Github. The algorithms [repository](https://github.com/TheAlgorithms) maintained by the open     source community. 
 
### Why even learn DS, huh?
- You will find DS and Algorithms everywhere in CS (and in the world). These concepts will help a lot in interview prep/machine coding rounds and in general also, **they will make you a better programmer.** 

- Data structures and Algorithms(not in this course still) are very important. **You can get better only by implementing, studying, understanding, [practicing]((https://jamesclear.com/deliberate-practice-theory#:~:text=Deliberate%20practice%20refers%20to%20a,specific%20goal%20of%20improving%20performance.)).**

  Further, this is mostly the implementation part. There are tonnes of DS related and algorithmic problems which you may come across later depending
  on whether you do interview/coding prep or you go one level beyond and do CP(do like seriously, CP is much more vast and logical)

- **Learn about the time complexities involved.** 

- **Try doing some related problems on GFG practice, LeetCode or InterviewBit (if time available)**. **(These are the most used websites for coding round/interview prep. You will be using them when the time comes or when you decide)** It's not necessary but I feel I could have practiced some problems. Also, for understanding concepts in these sites or YouTube is there. Youtube Channels like mycodeschool, Algorithms with Attitude, Back to Back SWE, Abdul Bari etc. **Check out MOOCs on Coursera also if interested.**
     
     - MOOCs are good but take them when really needed or you have a lot of interest or time.
     
     - [Data structures University of Illinois](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/cs-fundamentals) - I have not tried this but heard from topper kind of your batch guy that these courses are good. This is more relevant to your DS course. Although, you can just follow college Data structures course. That is enough.
      
     - [UC San Diego Specialization](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-structures-algorithms) - (Not that much relevant to your DS course)I have done first course. It was challenging. I am somewhere in between in the second and third course. Currently, I don't need the content much so will complete later. But this specialization is tough and probably one of the best in terms of depth and breadth of topics. 
     
## Some thoughts - CP related 
- DS will also act as foundation if you want to do competitive programming. CP and interview prep are different. Try reading about that difference.
  The type of questions in coding rounds are similar to what you do in labs. They are going to be more fun and logical (and difficult). CP is more 
  mathematical and algorithm/implementation based. The topics also vary. You can get a better idea by ofcourse doing a bit both of them or by reading.

### Tackling some misconceptions
   
  **You don't need to do Competitive programming to clear coding rounds/interviews** but those who are good at CP or even have some experience find it easier
  to prepare for coding interviews. Basically, for coding interviews, you practice those questions that are more relevant there.... Google, Microsoft only care     about you clearing their [interview](https://qr.ae/pNssEu). 
  
  **Just [start](https://youtu.be/y7169jEvb-Y?t=42) solving problems!!** Learn required DS and algo on the go. Mostly, it's about raw thinking in the initial stage. You will find a lot of problems      where you don't need to know any algorithm or specific data structure. Occasionally exploring resources is fine but don't go in the search of 
   the perfect all in one resource. (I used to do this quite a few times). I believe it is a subtle form of procrastination.
  
### Approach to CP in a nutshell  
   For CP, practice questions on Codeforces and Codechef. HackerRank problem solving section is good for starting.
  (I don't want to make this a CP blog so I won't write much here about resources. You will find on them on your own.)
  - Take Part in contests.
  
  - Focus more on practicing problems on Codeforces and upsolving. If your rating is x, then solve problems [ x, x + 200 ]. Only deliberate practice
    can make you better. 
  
  - Do not learn all the algo and ds stuff first. Things don't work like that. You learn on the go by practicing and studying what is required.
    This is called the project based learning approach sometimes in Dev world or Minimum viable knowledge. 
    Learning in Breadth first search way more and dfs sometimes is helpful in programming and CS.
    
  - There are a lot of resources about guidance on Quora and Codeforces (Google baba is there).You can check them out. Competitive programming is different from 
    normal data structures and algorithms that you implement in lab. You need to know these concepts but you **get good at CP by doing CP**. 
    
    Check out the concept of deliberate practice. In [general](https://jamesclear.com/deliberate-practice-theory#:~:text=Deliberate%20practice%20refers%20to%20a,specific%20goal%20of%20improving%20performance.) and CP related [Here](https://www.redgreencode.com/deliberate-practice-for-software-developers/) You can get **good at CP only by deliberate practice**.

    
    You need to be consistent and know the fact that it is going to be ridiculously hard (if you want to be good like Expert, Master on CF, 5 star on Codechef etc.). At the time of writing this, I am myself not good at CP. 
    But it's fun and one of the best ways to build problem solving, thinking, programming and debugging skills. (There are many other benefits). You
    also become a fast learner in the process.
       - [Errichto's Guide](https://github.com/Errichto/youtube/wiki/How-to-practice%3F?fbclid=IwAR3i4-RUmoN3VM2oY-tP3WC60maN3V7hd2R5vTeS7Xs7I1LXNdb5_VjTnUA) Errichto is a red coder on Codeforces and he has a youtube channel with quality content.
       - [Errichto's How to Become Red Coder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7169jEvb-Y)
       - [What CP is all about](https://qr.ae/TjA0uu) An answer which beautifully describes what CP is all about.
       - [How to get start with CP - by Sameer Gulati](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qG3tT_CaA68)  Check his other videos as well.
       - [Ashish Gupta's great answer](https://qr.ae/pNydnl) Check his other answers as well.
       - [Rough Roadmap to get idea about CP](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZOQVLll9u4&t=0s)
  - I would like to write a blog on CP (to save time for others) when I get good obviously xD. Currently, I am busy with other programming related work.

## Note
There is some non-DS lab material in the repository.

Commit message:

Added link to Peter Norvig's article.

README.md, after:

# Implementation of standard data structures

This repository contains all of the lab work done in CCE 3rd Sem Data Structure Lab. The DS lab was a pretty intense lab but it was worth it.
We had alternative week evaluations. I learnt to implement the standard data structures without using any sort of libraries. It helped to internalise 
the concepts. (You are allowed to use libraries outside the lab so don't worry)

Feel free to make changes and maybe suggest better codes.


## What you can find here
You can find the following codes here

- Basic Searching and Sorting Methods 
- Stack implementation using array, linkedlists and applications of stack like prefix,infix,postfix evaluation
- Single, Double, and circular LinkedLists programs
- Binary Trees
- Binary Search Tree and expression tree implementation.
- **Some thoughts and reflections** I would like to share to help you guys become better coders xD.

### If you are a junior reading this, keep following points in mind

You people are going to enter/entered the world of Computer Science, Development and programming in general. It's really vast and there
is a lot of cool and fun stuff to explore. Algorithms and Data structures is one such area. In general, you might be starting with this or some 
other field/track. You will realise that you are a newbie in lots of areas (and that is fine) and you will have to work your way up by practice and 
showing up daily (even if you are really passionate about it or not). There is no other shortcut and that is also good. The journey is the important thing.

- This repository is for your (and my reference). **So, use it when really required. But, do try your best and follow your teacher.** Ideally, you should 
  try to think and try enough till you are getting ideas (or if you have time). That way, even if you are not able to get it right, when you see the solution, you   will understand it quicker and it will stick for longer.

- Try implementing all the programs and additional exercises yourself. Try to play around a bit and learn to deal with segmentation faults. **Use cin and input   some variable in between to debug hint:infinite loop or segmentation fault** (Thanks to Veena Ma'am xD)

- Try not to copy. **You can see somebody else's implementation for reference though, then try to write on your own.** You will find yourself going back and forth 
  but that is okay. (Active learning - study something new and then try to reproduce it - the key ideas, concepts)
  
- You can check out standard code implementations available across Github. The algorithms [repository](https://github.com/TheAlgorithms) maintained by the open     source community. 
 
### Why even learn DS, huh?
- You will find DS and Algorithms everywhere in CS (and in the world). These concepts will help a lot in interview prep/machine coding rounds and in general also, **they will make you a better programmer.** 

- Data structures and Algorithms(not in this course still) are very important. **You can get better only by implementing, studying, understanding, [practicing]((https://jamesclear.com/deliberate-practice-theory#:~:text=Deliberate%20practice%20refers%20to%20a,specific%20goal%20of%20improving%20performance.)).**

  Further, this is mostly the implementation part. There are tonnes of DS related and algorithmic problems which you may come across later depending
  on whether you do interview/coding prep or you go one level beyond and do CP(do like seriously, CP is much more vast and logical)

- **Learn about the time complexities involved.** 

- **Try doing some related problems on GFG practice, LeetCode or InterviewBit (if time available)**. **(These are the most used websites for coding round/interview prep. You will be using them when the time comes or when you decide)** It's not necessary but I feel I could have practiced some problems. Also, for understanding concepts in these sites or YouTube is there. Youtube Channels like mycodeschool, Algorithms with Attitude, Back to Back SWE, Abdul Bari etc. **Check out MOOCs on Coursera also if interested.**
     
     - MOOCs are good but take them when really needed or you have a lot of interest or time.
     
     - [Data structures University of Illinois](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/cs-fundamentals) - I have not tried this but heard from topper kind of your batch guy that these courses are good. This is more relevant to your DS course. Although, you can just follow college Data structures course. That is enough.
      
     - [UC San Diego Specialization](https://www.coursera.org/specializations/data-structures-algorithms) - (Not that much relevant to your DS course)I have done first course. It was challenging. I am somewhere in between in the second and third course. Currently, I don't need the content much so will complete later. But this specialization is tough and probably one of the best in terms of depth and breadth of topics. 
     
## Some thoughts - CP related 
- DS will also act as foundation if you want to do competitive programming. CP and interview prep are different. Try reading about that difference.
  The type of questions in coding rounds are similar to what you do in labs. They are going to be more fun and logical (and difficult). CP is more 
  mathematical and algorithm/implementation based. The topics also vary. You can get a better idea by ofcourse doing a bit both of them or by reading.

### Tackling some misconceptions
   
  **You don't need to do Competitive programming to clear coding rounds/interviews** but those who are good at CP or even have some experience find it easier
  to prepare for coding interviews. Basically, for coding interviews, you practice those questions that are more relevant there.... Google, Microsoft only care     about you clearing their [interview](https://qr.ae/pNssEu). 
  
  **Just [start](https://youtu.be/y7169jEvb-Y?t=42) solving problems!!** Learn required DS and algo on the go. Mostly, it's about raw thinking in the initial stage. You will find a lot of problems      where you don't need to know any algorithm or specific data structure. Occasionally exploring resources is fine but don't go in the search of 
   the perfect all in one resource. (I used to do this quite a few times). I believe it is a subtle form of procrastination.
  
### Approach to CP in a nutshell  
   For CP, practice questions on Codeforces and Codechef. HackerRank problem solving section is good for starting.
  (I don't want to make this a CP blog so I won't write much here about resources. You will find on them on your own.)
  - Take Part in contests.
  
  - Focus more on practicing problems on Codeforces and upsolving. If your rating is x, then solve problems [ x, x + 200 ]. Only deliberate practice
    can make you better. 
  
  - Do not learn all the algo and ds stuff first. Things don't work like that. You learn on the go by practicing and studying what is required.
    This is called the project based learning approach sometimes in Dev world or Minimum viable knowledge. 
    Learning in Breadth first search way more and dfs sometimes is helpful in programming and CS.
    
  - There are a lot of resources about guidance on Quora and Codeforces (Google baba is there).You can check them out. Competitive programming is different from 
    normal data structures and algorithms that you implement in lab. You need to know these concepts but you **get good at CP by doing CP**. 
    
    Check out the concept of deliberate practice. In [general](https://jamesclear.com/deliberate-practice-theory#:~:text=Deliberate%20practice%20refers%20to%20a,specific%20goal%20of%20improving%20performance.) and CP related [Here](https://www.redgreencode.com/deliberate-practice-for-software-developers/) You can get **good at CP only by deliberate practice**. Peter Norvig's (Google AI head) [Teach yourself programming in 10 years](http://norvig.com/21-days.html) 
    
    You need to be consistent and know the fact that it is going to be ridiculously hard (if you want to be good like Expert, Master on CF, 5 star on Codechef etc.). At the time of writing this, I am myself not good at CP. 
    But it's fun and one of the best ways to build problem solving, thinking, programming and debugging skills. (There are many other benefits). You
    also become a fast learner in the process.
       - [Errichto's Guide](https://github.com/Errichto/youtube/wiki/How-to-practice%3F?fbclid=IwAR3i4-RUmoN3VM2oY-tP3WC60maN3V7hd2R5vTeS7Xs7I1LXNdb5_VjTnUA) Errichto is a red coder on Codeforces and he has a youtube channel with quality content.
       - [Errichto's How to Become Red Coder](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7169jEvb-Y)
       - [What CP is all about](https://qr.ae/TjA0uu) An answer which beautifully describes what CP is all about.
       - [How to get start with CP - by Sameer Gulati](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qG3tT_CaA68)  Check his other videos as well.
       - [Ashish Gupta's great answer](https://qr.ae/pNydnl) Check his other answers as well.
       - [Rough Roadmap to get idea about CP](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZOQVLll9u4&t=0s)
  - I would like to write a blog on CP (to save time for others) when I get good obviously xD. Currently, I am busy with other programming related work.

## Note
There is some non-DS lab material in the repository.
